
The tools subdirectory contains various Neverball-related utilities.
Currently it only contains the replay converter and a wrapper Windows NT
command shell script.

  * democonv

    A bare-bones Neverball 1.4.0 to v4 (Neverball 1.5.0) format replay
    converter.  Reads a replay from standard input and writes a
    converted replay to standard output.  See below for examples.

    democonv recognizes several command line options.  Default values
    are used when an option is not present (these are noted below).
    Unrecognized options are silently ignored.  Multiple options of the
    same kind may be given, but only the last one will be used.  These
    options are recognized:

        --help

            Request a usage message.  A short list of options and their
            meanings is printed to standard error and democonv exits
            with a non-zero exit code.

        --goal
        --time-out
        --fall-out
            
            Specify the outcome of the replay.  By default none of these
            values is used, resulting in a "status:  aborted" message at
            the replay selection screen.

        --best-time
        --most-coins
        --freestyle

            Specify the type of the record.  Although promising, these
            options only influence what game mode to set for the replay.
            The practice mode is used for Best Time replays and the
            normal mode is used for Most Coins replays.  A custom value
            is used for Freestyle replays which is also the default when
            none of these options is present.  This results in an "mode:
            unknown" message at the replay selection screen.

        --player <name>

            Specify name of the player.  Name of any length may be used
            here, but only the first 8 bytes are meaningful.  Using
            characters not in ASCII is discouraged.  It will work but it
            won't make sense.  The default value is "Player".

        --date <datetime>

            Specify the date and time of creation.  These are treated as
            local date/time and are used to calculate the actual UTC
            time to store in the replay.  datetime should be in the
            following format:  YYYY-mm-ddTHH:MM:SS.  "T" is literally
            the character T.  The default value is 2003-07-16T00:00:00
            (UTC).  (Trivia:  it is the date of posting of Super Empty
            Ball on flipcode.)

    A few examples:

        $ democonv --goal --most-coins --player parasti \
          --date 2006-10-10T15:30:00 < cE01para > cE01para.nbr

        $ wget -O - http://lots.of.replays.org/fM25mym | democonv \
          --fall-out --player mym > fM25mym.nbr

    Windows users, note that cmd.exe supports input redirection and
    pipes the same way Unix shells do, so these examples should work in
    Windows NT command shell.  Substitute '>' for the prompt sign and
    '^' for the line continuation symbol.

  * convert-replays.bat

    A convenience wrapper script around democonv for Windows users.
    This script takes a list of files on its command line and saves
    sucessfully converted files to the current working directory.
    Wildcards are supported.  Original filenames with the '.nbr'
    extension appended are used for converted files.

    convert-replays.bat recognizes all of democonv's command line
    options.  In addition, a --prefix option is recognized.

        --prefix <pref>

            Specify a prefix to use for filenames of converted files.
            Useful if you want to save converted files to a directory
            other than CWD.

    Examples:

        > convert-replays --player Dave --most-coins c*dav
        > convert-replays --goal --player parasti ^
          --prefix ..\new-replays\ ..\old-replays\*

